---
layout: post
title:  "What is version control, git, and github"
date:   2016-01-03
categories: git github versioning
---

### The Basics! Version Control

Let's start out with the basics. What is version control? Well, quite
simply, it's a system that allows developers to keep track of the
changes to all of their files. It tells them what changes have been made
to a folder, file, or even a sentence within a file. It also allows them
to see who made the change (for group projects), and at what time the
change was made. Your first thought might be that this is too difficult,
but don't worry, even lazy people like me can take advantage of this
easy to use system.

To express the dilemma of being without version control, I'm going to
zoom back in time to when I was in gradeschool when I was just starting
to type my own papers. I know you might be thinking... "gradeschool?,
how old is this guy?" Fortunately, not that old. I think I was using
Microsoft Office when I started typing my first papers. If you were
anything like me growing up, you would constantly be invoking the “File
\> Save As” button and making new versions of the same paper over, and
over, and over again. Over time, this would become very complicated. I
could only see the date the older versions were modified, but I couldn’t
for the life of me remember what the heck I changed. In desperation, I
had to invent my own version control system. This entailed repeating the
"Save As" technique a ton of times, iterating each version with short
names describing the change. The result would be loads of files on my
computer with odd names like “Version1\_kindofcrappy”,
“Version2\_OkNotBad” and, well...you get the point.

### **Git** with it!

Now that you know *why* developer's, or for that matter, anyone, needs
version control, let's talk about one of the most popular version
control system's out there, git. Git essentially allows the content
creator (you!), to be able to accomplish versioning and tracking without
actually having to “Save As”. You get to keep just one file name, and
anytime you want to make a new version, you just have to run a few
simple commands to make sure that you mark the files for change. Any
time you are ready to submit a major change, you can leave a comment
about the change. This way, you don't have to leave your self
deprecating remarks in the filename (only kidding). If you are working
on a project, you will probably keep all of your files in one main
folder, such as DansBlogPost. The way Git works is that you designate
this main directory as your "repository". All the content in this
directory has the ability to be tracked, and Git can even tell when you
have changed a file so that you can easily know when it's the right time
to take a "snapshot", or as Git calls, a "commit". Don't worry, your
folders won't be overflowing with all these changes and comments. When
you observe your files and folders through the "normal people" viewer
(OS X finder or Windows Explorer), you will see only one copy. All of
the extra versions are nicely kept in a hidden folder called ".git" so
as to not concern all the muggles (non coding folk) who might be sharing
your server space.

This is of course an oversimplified explanation of GIT. However, I can
tell you from personal experience that taking the leap from
understanding what Git does, to how to use it, is achievable in just a
few days. But wait! Before turning all of your folders into git
repositories, you need to know about Github. Let's say you wanted to
have 2, 3, or even hundreds of other people collaborate on your project.
Well, you can, thanks to the fine folks who developed Github.

### GitHub : The cloud for your code

I think of GitHub as a giant home for all of my project code to live on
the web. I can give keys for my home to all of my friends and they can
come in and take any item out of my house, give it a nice addition (or
subtraction), and then send the item right back into my house. Of
course, I would likely be reviewing the change before it becomes a
permanent part of my house. In Git terms, each time I let something
become part of my house again, it becomes a "merge". GitHub still uses
the same Git repository system that you have on your computer, but it
allows you to store your repository in a central place where many coders
can collaborate on it at once. It also brings in a nice graphical web
interface where changes can be seen easily right in your browser, from
anywhere! Go ahead, use your finely honed navigating skills to get to
[www.github.com](http://www.github.com) and create a free account.

I hope this gives you a good understanding of what version control is,
and a little bit about how you can use git and github to track your code
and collaborate with others on it.
