---
layout: post
title:  "SQL Injection : A high level overview"
date:   2016-02-21
categories: SQL
excerpt: "These days, it is more important than it ever has been to implement the
highest standard of security when it comes to data that can be accessed
over the internet."
---

These days, it is more important than it ever has been to implement the
highest standard of security when it comes to data that can be accessed
over the internet. Our credit cards, names, home addresses, and many
other pieces of vital information are stored in databases on servers all
over the world.

SQL injection is one way that hackers have been able to access, corrupt,
and rewrite information stored in databases, and they have been doing it
for years. It is important to understand a little bit about how they are
able to do this.

### User Input = The Hackers Terminal

SQL queries are happening multiple times per day in your life whether
you are aware of it or not. When you go online on your bank's website to
log in, your username is correlated to your password through a table.
Your user input gets used to fill in the values of a SQL query
statement. For instance:

{% highlight sql %}
SELECT from users
WHERE userInput = name;
{% endhighlight %}

In this case, userInput would be the string that the user entered in the user
field. Let's just say that the hacker entered the value name for
username and it turned the statement into name = name. Since name is
always equal to name, this could potentially return all of the usernames
in the database back to the hacker.

In reality, bank websites likely have many more layers of security than
that, however, this is essentially how SQL injection allows hackers to
“inject” commands into your server. Fortunately, SQL injection can be
avoided by using “SQL parameters” to filter out such attacks.

### Protect Yourself - Read OWAP

OWAP, *The Open Web Application Security Project*, provides detailed
information about web security free to the public! They have a specific
aritcle on how to easily prevent SQL injection attacks. I highly
recommend you use [this resource](https://www.owasp.org/index.php/SQL_Injection_Prevention_Cheat_Sheet)
if you want to learn more!
